---
layout: exhibit
title: 'School and Community in Harlem: The P.S. 194 All-Day Neighborhood School'
author: Rachel Klepper
publish_date: 2017  
permalink: /exhibits/adns/
---

{% include inline_image.html collection='exh' pid='kle004' %}

<p class="p1">Between 1942 and 1969, P.S. 194 Countee Cullen on W 144<span class="s1"><sup>th</sup></span> Street in Harlem was designated as an All-Day Neighborhood School. It was the second school to join an experimental program designed by Adele Franklin, which kept the school open until 5pm for clubs and activities and offered extra supports to students and teachers. These included additional teachers to lead small group classes, social workers, parent activities, and curriculum enhancements. A coalition of groups supported the program, uniting the Board of Education with the privately run Public Education Association and individual volunteers from Harlem and around the city. All-Day Neighborhood Schools expressed their purpose as bridging the gap between “home, school, and community,” and imagined a transformation in the role of the school in children’s lives.<span class="Apple-converted-space">&nbsp;</span></p>
<p class="p2">This exhibit seeks to place the All-Day Neighborhood School within its context as an educational plan and as a Harlem institution. <strong>What did it mean to bring school and community together? Why was that goal significant in Harlem and at P.S. 194?</strong> To do so, it begins with background on P.S. 194 and the educational environment into which it emerged in 1940, including other existing opportunities for youth in Harlem and the circumstances that led to the program’s start. It then turns to an examination of the program itself, and the ways that it offered a different experience than at other Harlem elementary schools. The final pages explore the evolving ideologies behind the All-Day Neighborhood School model, particularly as similar programs came to proliferate in Harlem in the 1960s.</p>
<p class="p1">The thirty year history of the All-Day Neighborhood School at P.S. 194 speaks to a number of broader educational themes that remain relevant today. As you go through the exhibit, you may consider how its story informs your thinking on the following questions:</p>
<p class="p2"><strong>1. How do schools and school systems experiment? What is the legacy or significance of a program that affects one school during a specific time frame? Can experiments be implemented equitably?</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>2. What groups and individuals have power to determine the direction of schools? What is the role of private organizations in public schooling?</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>3. What is the role of the school in meeting students social, cultural, and physical needs? What institutions share responsibility for children outside of the classroom?</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>4. How has the school system perpetuated racial discrimination and segregation or differentiated education systems? What assumptions about race or class underly programs like the All-Day Neighborhood Schools?</strong></p>
<p class="p2">Each of these questions can be asked at many larger or smaller scales. This exhibit looks at an example of a single school and its participation in a program that reached a very small percent of New York City’s elementary schools. While speaking to broad themes, it is a project about P.S. 194 and about Harlem. It attempts to see P.S. 194 both as a unique site of a special program, and as part of a neighborhood that holistically faced a specific set of challenges.<span class="Apple-converted-space">&nbsp;</span></p>
<p class="p1">The exhibit is based on research done in the Board of Education Records at the New York City Municipal Archives. Some of the documents presented are from administrators who interacted with the All-Day Neighborhood School program, but the majority are from the Public Education Association series. Records contain correspondence and meeting notes that detail the progress and management of the All-Day Neighborhood Schools as well as materials that were used to publicize the program’s successes and needs. Therefore, they represent a one-sided perspective that is largely administrative and positive. Missing from the archive are voices of students or families from P.S. 194, or indications of how they may have felt about the program. There is much more to discover about the day to day experience at P.S. 194 and the lives of those who learned at the All-Day Neighborhood School.</p>
<p class="p1"><strong>A note about P.S. 194’s name:</strong> In 1963 the school was officially renamed to honor Harlem Renaissance poet Countee Cullen, and is now known as P.S. 194 Countee Cullen. I have attempted to use the full name to reference the school after 1963 and have called it P.S. 194 when speaking about it before that year.

HEADER - P.S. 194 and Harlem Schools in 1942

<p class="p1">When P.S. 194 became an All-Day Neighborhood School in 1942 it was only two years old. Opened in 1940 after two years of construction, P.S. 194 was one of a few schools to be built in Harlem after 1935, responding to serious overcrowding in classrooms. In an <em>Amsterdam News</em> article announcing the approval of its funding, Gertrude Ayer, principal of P.S. 24 in Harlem and the first African American female principal in New York City, was quoted saying,<span class="Apple-converted-space">&nbsp;</span></p>
<blockquote>
<p class="p1"><em>“It has taken our community a long time to convince the Board of Education and the members of the Board of Estimate that whatever may be true of Manhattan and its declining population is not the case with Harlem. Our community is one of growing population and additional school and recreational facilities should and must be provided to meet our expanding needs.”</em></p>
</blockquote>
<p class="p1">P.S. 194 opened and became an All-Day Neighborhood School in the midst of debates by activists, educators, and city officials about the future of schooling in Harlem.</p>

<h3 style="text-align: left;">&nbsp;</h3>
<h3 style="text-align: left;">Who Attended P.S. 194?</h3>
<p class="p1">While there is little recorded about P.S. 194’s first years, its student body consisted of children from the surrounding neighborhood. In 1940 a school administrator reported student nationalities to the Board of Education, listing 1,029 African American students whose fathers were born in the United States, and 320 whose fathers were born in the West Indies.</p>

{% include inline_image.html collection='exh' pid='kle001' %}

<p class="p1">P.S. 194’s population reflects the fact that by 1940, with migration from the South and the West Indies as well as movement north from other parts of Manhattan, the majority of Harlem’s population was black. Although it is not certain exactly where the zoning boundaries for P.S. 194 would have been, a Columbia University social work student studying the All-Day Neighborhood School in 1945 wrote that they were 142<span class="s1"><sup>nd</sup></span> Street, 145<span class="s1"><sup>th</sup></span> Street, Bradhurst Avenue, and Lenox Avenue. Much of Harlem, including this area, faced poverty and deteriorating housing conditions, which had worsened during the Great Depression. There was an especially high proportion of young people living in Harlem too, in need of academic and social opportunities. These demographics are illustrated through 1940 census data below, with the rectangle highlighting the potential boundaries for P.S. 194.

{% include inline_image.html collection='exh' pid='kle021' %}

{% include inline_image.html collection='exh' pid='kle022' %}

HEADER - Context for P.S. 194: Harlem Schools 1935-1940

<p class="p1">P.S. 194 was opened in 1940 in response to years of activism pushing for improvements to Harlem’s schools. Attention had turned to education alongside economic conditions in 1935, following the “Harlem Riot.” When a black Puerto Rican teenager was arrested for shoplifting at a store in Harlem, a rumor spread that he had been killed or injured by the police. The incident elicited further anger among black residents already affected by increasing poverty, police violence, and discrimination in Harlem, leading to looting of stores on 125<span class="s1"><sup>th</sup></span>&nbsp;Street and three deaths. In response, Mayor LaGuardia started a commission to investigate conditions in Harlem, including education. While confirming the need to address racial discrimination, severe overcrowding, and the systemic lack of resources, the report led to few immediate changes. Yet the new schools that were built in following years, like P.S. 194, did represent the results of pressure for change and hope for a better system.<span class="Apple-converted-space">&nbsp;</span></p>
<p class="p1">Concerns about Harlem schools went beyond overcrowding, so simply building more schools was not all that was needed. The LaGuardia Report also highlighted low academic achievement and negative teacher attitudes towards working in Harlem. It found many teachers to be unsympathetic to their students and that both black and white teachers preferred not to be placed at all-black schools. While these complaints did not apply to every teacher, many of Harlem’s teachers were the most inexperienced and they did not receive adequate training for their placements.<span class="Apple-converted-space">&nbsp;&nbsp;</span>Community members questioned whether teachers had equal expectations for black and white students’ learning, and more radical groups advocated for structural changes to challenge racism in education.<span class="Apple-converted-space">&nbsp;</span></p>
<p class="p1">In&nbsp;<em>Uncivil Rights: Teachers, Unions, and Race in the Battle for School Equity</em>, Jonna Perrillo describes this atmosphere and the way it interacted with the increasing use of social science in educational philosophy. The Board of Education focused on the connections between social environment and learning, arguing that Harlem children faced poverty, violence, and weak family ties that led to academic failure. This implied that improvements to educational outcomes would require changes to students’ home lives rather than to their schools. At the same time, it answered the call for an increase in resources to Harlem’s schools. The language of community and its interaction with schooling, which would become part of the All-Day Neighborhood School ideology and model at P.S. 194, fits within this context.</p>
